Now that we know how to use a arrays where they're fast where they're slow we're gonna get into a part
that is not crucial for interviews but it's good to understand how they work and how to build an array.
Most likely in an interview you won't get asked.
Hey building Ray from the beginning but I do want to build those foundations for you so that we understand
a race from a fundamental level so let's build an array ourselves now.
In this video we're gonna be using the class syntax in JavaScript so we're gonna create an array class
even though with JavaScript and many other languages we can just do this and we've created an array.
Let's see if we can build one of our own.
Because as you'll find out as we go through this course data structures are simply things that we can
build from scratch.
We can create whatever data structure we want.
We can create our own data structure.
The most common data structures are well known and are already implemented in most languages because
they're so useful.
But you are able to build any data structure you want from scratch.
And as you'll find out most data structures are built on top of other data structures now to get started.
We're going to create an array in javascript but just a heads up.
JavaScript is a bit of an interesting case.
A raise in JavaScript are just objects with integer based keys that act like indexes and that's what
we're gonna build.
Different languages will have this implementation differently but what we're gonna learn here is still
going to be applicable to how Arrays work in other languages so we're gonna start off with creating
a class let's start off with creating a class and we'll call this my array and within the my array will
have a constructor which is the initial function that will be run when we create this my array and this
constructor is going to have two data points.
One is the length the property because with an array we're able to determine the length of the array
and the initial length will be 0.
That is how many items the array has and then will obviously have the data within the array.
And this is going to be an object.
Now what's the most common action that we have in an array.
What's the access to access the data.
So let's create a get method and this get method is going to take an index to actually grab the data
from memory.
So I'm going to just say return this dot data and if this keyword is confusing to you.
Make sure you watch the previous video.
This dot data is just referring to this data that we've created in the constructor and we're just going
to return the data at the index that we're requiring.
Let's see how this would work in action.
To create a new Miri all we need to do is say const new array
and we use the new keyword in javascript to instantiate this or create a copy of this class like this.
So now if I do console dialog new array and I click Run I get my array that has property length of zero
and data that is empty if I do new Array dot get zero index of zero I get on defined well because there's
nothing in this object we have no items and JavaScript automatically has the type on defined when.
While there's nothing let's add our next method that is the push method to add something at the end
of the array.
So I'm going to create a push method and this method will take in an item that we will give it and within
here will simply add this to the data of our object it's going to add it to the length of our item.
So because we have zero items and the length is zero.
This is going to add the data at this dot data zero index in the zero index will simply now contain
the item and because we want to keep adding items if we want it to we will say this dot length plus
plus because now our array has a length of 1 instead of 0.
So that next time we run the push method this dot length will be 1 and the new item will be added at
index of 1 and let's just return this dot length for now because the typical push method in JavaScript
will usually return the length of the array.
Let's run this and see what happens.
I'm going to say that down here we'll see we'll have new Array dot push and we're going to push high.
If I run this I see I have my array length 1 data is going to have a prop. 0 0.
Hi.
Nice.
What if we add another thing let's do new Array Dot.
Push and we'll say you if I run this I have length of 2.
Now with index of 0 at high.
Or index of 0 has high and they index of 1 has you.
Very cool.
What else can we do.
Well let's add the pop command to remove the last item of the array once again we have the pop method
that doesn't receive anything we don't need to pass it a parameter all we need to do is delete the last
item in the array.
We can simply have a variable let's say last item that grabs the last item in our data object.
So this is going to just simply be this DOD data at index of length minus 1.
Remember we want the index of 1 even though the lengths to because we're counting 0 1 we want the last
item in the data.
And from here we can just use the delete key word in JavaScript and say this dot data at this dot length
minus 1.
Just delete that item and obviously we need to decrease.
So just shorthand here in javascript to decrease the length of our data by 1 and then finally we can
just return the item that we deleted.
So now if I run another command and by the way you might see here that I've missed the semicolons in
JavaScript.
Most of the time you can get away with not adding semicolons.
And some people don't use semicolons at all in JavaScript.
Don't get too distracted by that.
Sometimes I forget and it's not really important at least for our purposes.
Let's add a new item to the array that's gonna be the exclamation point and I'm going to say my or new
Array dot pop.
If I run this I get an error saying item because this should be last item.
Here you go.
Let's run that again and we see that it's high you because the exclamation mark has been deleted.
If I run pop again
I see that I have length of one and only high remaining.
Very cool.
All right let's add one last one and to show you why some operations in a race are.
Oh then we're going to add the delete method
and the delete method is going to take an index which item we want to delete and then here we will have
to do a cost item.
So we're going to create a reference to this dot data index which is the item we want to delete and
how are we going to delete this.
Because remember in an array we'll have to delete the item then shift the index of all the other data
types by 1 what because we want to follow good coding practices using the idea of single responsibility
principle.
Let's add a another function that does this for us that does the shifting of data for us.
I'm going to create a new method and we do this in javascript using this syntax shift items in this
method is going to take the index that we received here and the delete.
Now this shift items we can create it here and say that shift items.
Method and by the way I use the words function and methods interchangeably sometimes methods simply
means is a function within a class.
So this this shift items will be a method of my array but it is a function.
So this function which is a method of my array will have the index parameter passed into it.
And this is where we do some fun things we're going to have to loop through the items.
So that's a for loop which right away should ring the bell and say oh this is an o of an operation we're
going to have an index of 0 or I of 0 actually instead of 0.
Remember because we want to shift items not all of them just wherever the index starts from we say index.
And now I will have to be this stored length.
So I is less than this length minus one and we're going to increment I by one each time through the
loop within this loop all we're gonna do is say this dot data are data at each index that we loop through
is going to equal this dot data that I plus one.
Mm hmm.
What just happened here Well we're saying start at the index that we want to start the delete from and
iterate through it all the way until the end.
And within this loop I want you to take each item in the data that we have and instead of what it had
before I want you to add the data that is right next to it at plus 1.
So if we had an array that is 0 and 2 I'm saying from the index of 0 over here I want you to now instead
make 0 equal to 2.
So index of Y plus 1.
So we're shifting the items to the left by one so we have shifted here all the items one to the left
and because we did that the index that we gave it for the delete automatically gets replaced because
that I is going to get replaced.
Now there's an issue here right.
Because now the very last item in the array that is this dot data at this dot length minus 1 which is
the last item in the array will still exists.
We've shifted everything over by 1 but we've never touched the very last item because we stopped when
I.
Is less than this dot left minus one.
So this is still full.
So I'm going to comment this out and just show you what happens if we just leave it like this.
I'm going to run the new
Array dot delete and I'm going to remove the pup mans for now and in the delete I'm going to say I want
to delete the you item.
So that's index of 1 5 run this I get high you is deleted but then I have exclamation mark at index
of 1.
So the shifting is working but at index of 2 I still have the exclamation mark because while we never
deleted it we've shifted everything once over but we never touched index of two.
So all we need to do to get rid of that is the delete keyword to delete the last item and obviously
to decrement our length because we've just delete an item we can do this dot length minus minus if we
run this now hey look at that length of too high exclamation mark let's play a literal round to make
sure everything is working here if let's say I add a couple more push commands here and we'll say here
are high you are and then let's say nice if I run this I get high exclamation mark ah nice that doesn't
make senseless changes to zero to remove the high if I run this I get you exclamation mark ah nice that's
still doesn't make sense let's remove the exclamation mark so that we only have you are nice I'm going
to run the new array and we can delete index of 1 which is the exhumation Mark and let's see what we
get then if I run this I get you are nice
Now you might look at this and want to add your own methods you might want to let's say in here return
the last item just as a reference which is how it works in javascript but I think for now you have an
understanding of how Arrays work and how they're implemented underneath the hood we have simple 0 of
1 commands which are really really nice but as soon as we have to start shifting indexes and changing
things around we have to loop over things which makes it 0 event or linear time I'm going to leave this
for you as a playground after this lesson so you can add your own things maybe you write it in different
languages and explore a little bit more into a race but this video's already getting long I want you
to get to board now so I'll see you in the next video.
Bye bye.